TITLE: Crypto × AI
URL: https://www.ritualfoundation.org/docs/overview/crypto-x-ai
SLUG: crypto-x-ai

---

Skip to main contentRitual home pageSearch or ask...⌘KAsk AISearch...NavigationCrypto × AIDocumentationX (Twitter)CommunityGitHubOn this pageWhat is the current state of AI?Why does AI need to be on-chain?Crypto is the only proven decentralizing forceTop models will be open-sourceRitual is the conduit for Crypto × AI
​What is the current state of AI?
It took ChatGPT just under two months to reach 100 million monthly active
users. One in every five Americans uses LLMs in their day-to-day life, with
half being under the age of thirty.
We are in the early innings of consumer market fit with a Cambrian explosion of
AI applications being built. Yet, the way AI predominantly exists today is not
sustainable:
Data & compute oligopoly: The race for better model performance has come
down a moatless tug of war over access to user data and GPU resources.
Regulatory capture
and monopolization is becoming the de facto standard.
Closed model monopolies: The best performing models (see
model leaderboards) are dominated by centralized
research powerhouses (OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.) unwilling to share their
methodology or open-source their weights.
Alignment autocracy: Models are subjectively censored by centralized
corporations under the guise of AI safety and fairness.
Privacy violations: User data, including private conversations, is
commonly
used as content for model training,
eroding any notion of privacy.
Arbitrary censorship: Centralized AI-servicing corporations selectively
censor requests, users, and
even entire nations.
Forced trust: Users consuming closed-source AI models must trust
operators to run models correctly without manipulating their inputs or
cheating them with worse models.
Limited user preference: Users have limited choice over optimizing for
speed or cost, instead defaulting to just the hosted services offered by
model providers. Limited competition inhibits cost improvement.
Platform risk: Developers building on centralized AI
face competition
from the providers themselves, risking having their business stolen and
losing their underlying API access.
​Why does AI need to be on-chain?
It is more crucial than ever to maintain AI systems that are transparent,
unbiased, and free from undue control. AI has the power to do significant good
in the hands of many, but without open access, governance, and ownership,
may unintentionally do more harm.
​Crypto is the only proven decentralizing force
There is no technology in the world with as powerful a claim to decentralization
as crypto.
Fundamentally, blockchain networks enable self-sovereign control of data and
capital, without reliance on singular intermediaries. The very nature of these
immutable ledgers supports perpetual verifiability and provenance.
Naturally, blockchains empower composability, letting AI applications
combine, interoperate, and grow intelligence.
​Top models will be open-source
Open-source LLM model evals have rapidly converged to the performance of
state-of-the-art, closed-source models, closing the gap that existed just two
years ago. Developers now have credible alternatives to break free from reliance
on centralized AI providers.
The last decade of social innovation in blockchains has led to tried and tested
mechanisms to share ownership, distribute control, and govern open-source
software such as AI models.
​Ritual is the conduit for Crypto × AI
Ritual is purpose-built to decentralize access to AI compute:
Enshrined compute: Ritual
enshrines AI models, enabling
ownership and provenance.
Censorship resistant: Anyone can decentrally
join, validate, and contribute to
Ritual.
Composable: Ritual enables AI composability powering use cases like
Smart Agents.
Verifiable AI Provenance: Ritual enables open- and closed-source model
verifiability.
Privacy: Cascade powers Ritual’s industry-defining inference privacy.
Modular computational integrity: Ritual empowers applications to choose
the computational integrity primitive that
best fits their use case.
Optimized user cost: Users dictate their speed/cost preference via
Resonance.
Node specialization: Hardware-optimized nodes specialize in compute via
Symphony.
Developer tools: EVM++,
EIP Extensions,
Scheduled Transactions,
Enshrined Oracles,
Infernet,
Modular Storage, and
more powerful AI application building blocks.
Model monetization: Ritual enables users to
train, track, and trade AI models.
Familiar interface: Ritual is seamless for both
Web2 APIs and Web3
smart contracts.
⌘IAssistantResponses are generated using AI and may contain mistakes.